For centuries, [music]
ships crossed the oceans guided by the
sun and the stars.
In 1831, the HMS Beagle set out on its
second voyage to explore the world with
a young naturalist named [music] Charles
Darwin on board.
For the next 5 years, it embarked on a
journey that reshaped our understanding
of life on Earth as we knew it.
But what technology allowed it to circle
the globe
at a time when vast [music] stretches of
the world's coastlines were still
uncharted?
To show you how the Beagle worked,
[music] how it was built, and the
navigation instruments that made these
voyages possible, we spent hundreds of
hours researching, scripting, modeling,
and animating this video.
My name is Ben, and this is
Deconstructed.
HMS Beagle was launched in 1820 as a
Cherokee-class 10-gun brig-sloop of the
Royal Navy.
Ships of this class were compact but
capable, small, maneuverable, two-masted
warships built around a single gun deck
designed to operate independently across
long distances.
But by the time Beagle entered service,
the strategic landscape had shifted.
With the end of the Napoleonic Wars, the
demand for ships like her had suddenly
diminished.
Rather than being destroyed, she was
placed in reserve, where she remained
for several years.
In peacetime, however, the Royal Navy
faced a different kind of pressure.
Maintaining a large fleet required
justification, both financially and
operationally.
To address this, some vessels were
reassigned to new roles.
Among the most important was global
exploration, driven by a growing
commercial need for accurate charts to
support and expand Britain's maritime
trade routes.
In 1825, Beagle underwent a significant
transformation to [music] meet this
demand.
Her armament was reduced, shifting her
away from combat.
A third mizzen mast was added,
converting her into a bark, and new
forecastle and poop decks [music] were
constructed to improve her seaworthiness
and functionality on long voyages.
Over the following years, between 1826
and 1843,
Beagle completed three major survey
expeditions, conducting extensive
hydrographic work across multiple
[music] regions of the world.
She is most widely known for her second
voyage, from 1831 to 1836.
Onboard was a Charles Darwin, whose
observations during that journey would
go on to shape his theory of evolution.
After her first voyage, the ship
underwent another refit, and we will
present her as she appeared during the
second voyage.
The ship's length along the gun deck
measured 27.5
m, roughly the length of two semi-trucks
lined up end to end, and at its widest
point, a beam of 7.5 m.
From the keel to the tip of the tallest
mast, it rose to a height of 34 m.
Originally designed to carry around 120
men as a warship, the Beagle sailed with
just 65 after her conversion.
The vessel itself was arranged across
multiple decks, beginning with the
opening working decks above, descending
through the crew's living spaces on the
lower deck, and finally down into the
deep storage areas of the hold.
We'll walk through each of these spaces
in detail, starting at the sails and
working our way downward, deck by deck,
and uncover the navigation instruments
that allowed the crew to determine their
position with remarkable precision, long
before modern technology.
In long voyages like this, illness was a
constant risk and medical care was
limited to what was available on board.
If something went seriously wrong, you
were on your own. No specialist, no
second opinion, [music]
just hope the person treating you knew
what they were doing.
Thankfully, [music] most of us aren't
out at sea, but even today, finding the
right doctor can still feel harder than
it should. Trust me, I once had to
describe a very questionable rash to
multiple receptionists before getting
anywhere.
Most people don't avoid it because they
don't care. They avoid it because it's a
hassle. Searching, calling, waiting,
it's enough to make you put it off.
That's exactly why tools like Zocdoc
exist, today's video sponsor. Zocdoc is
a free website where you can find and
book doctors all in one place. You can
search by condition, read verified
reviews, [music] and see real-time
availability. With over 150,000
providers and 200 plus specialties, you
can find [music] someone who actually
fits your needs. Whether it's in person
or a quick video [music] visit. No hold
music, no phone calls and explaining
weird rashes over the phone. No waiting
months for an appointment. [music] Just
a few clicks and you're booked. Plus,
it's completely free.
>> [music]
>> Darwin had to sail to the ends of the
earth to make his discoveries. You just
need your phone. If something's been on
your mind, and I have a feeling for some
of you it has, this is your moment to
finally [music] take care of your
health. Head to zocdoc.com/deconstructed
to find a doctor that's right for you.
[music] Thank you to Zocdoc for
sponsoring today's video and for helping
us all take better care of our health.
The Beagle followed the frame first
construction method, standard for the
period.
In this approach, the internal timber
framework, primarily made of oak, was
erected first with the outer planking
added afterward.
Construction began with the keel, laid
down as the ship's backbone.
From there, the frames or ribs were
installed along the keel at close
intervals.
These defined the shape of the hull and
provided most of its structural
strength.
Because the Beagle was originally built
as a warship, her hull adhered to Royal
Navy standards with closely spaced
frames that increased rigidity and
durability.
Deck beams were then installed across
the frames, supporting the decks above
and distributing loads throughout the
structure.
Above the keel, mast steps were fitted,
anchoring the bases of the masts
directly into the strongest part of the
ship.
For those interested in a deeper look,
we've created a dedicated deep dive
video focused entirely on hull
construction of warships from this era,
covering details not shown here, and
available exclusively to our YouTube and
Patreon members.
Finally, by the late 18th century, ships
like Beagle were fitted with copper
sheathing along the underwater portion
of the hull, a critical upgrade that
protected it from marine growth,
preserving both speed and performance
over long voyages.
Rising above the hull were the ship's
three masts, the foremast forward, the
mainmast amidships as the tallest, and
the mizzenmast aft as the smallest.
These were not single pieces of timber,
but built from multiple sections.
At each junction, the next section
rested on a platform called a top,
secured in place by a mast cap above.
Each section was supported by shrouds,
which provided lateral stability,
preventing side-to-side movement.
Between them ran ratlines, or horizontal
tied ropes, forming ladder-like steps
for the crew to climb.
Running fore and aft were the stays,
stabilizing the masts lengthwise.
The foremast and mainmast carried
horizontal spars known as yards, which
supported square sails, most effective
when sailing with the wind behind the
ship.
Some of these yards were fitted with
extendable spars for stunsails,
additional sails deployed in fair
weather to increase the ship's sail
area.
All three masts also carried gaffs,
which supported fore and aft sails that
played a key role in steering and
maneuverability.
At the bow, the bowsprit projected
forward, extended by a jib boom secured
through the bowsprit cap, and even
further by a flying jib boom held in
place by a smaller boom cap.
Together, these supported jibs and
staysails, allowing the ship to capture
wind from multiple directions.
When combined, the masts, sails, and
rigging formed a highly refined system
developed over centuries that allowed
the ship to harness wind with remarkable
efficiency.
But that was far from its greatest
innovation.
To capture it in a single frame, we
created this poster. Grab yours through
the link in the description. Every
purchase directly supports the channel
and the team behind it.
We're also giving one away.
For a chance to win one, like this
video, subscribe, and comment. What
surprised you most about the HMS Beagle?
We'll announce the winner in the next
video.
And a quick shout-out to our last
giveaway winner. Congratulations.
For a survey vessel like the Beagle,
small boats were essential.
They allowed the crew to reach areas the
ship itself could not, shallow waters,
narrow inlets, rivers, and shorelines.
During her second voyage, the Beagle
[music] carried seven small boats.
A yawl and a cutter, small sailboats
used for close [music] to shore
exploration, were stowed amidships on
the deck.
Behind them were two whaleboats and two
gigs.
The whaleboats were stored above the
deck, while the gigs were [music]
suspended on davits.
These long, narrow, oar-powered boats
were ideal for surveying shallow waters.
At the stern hung the jolly boat, a
small, oar-powered craft used to
transport crew between the ship and
shore.
Now, [music] let's take a look at the
key external components of the ship's
hull.
At the very front of the ship was the
bow, where the figurehead was mounted
prominently, a carved wooden decoration
often tied to the ship's identity.
HMS Beagle was named [music] after the
hunting dog breed, as was common
practice among the Royal Navy to name
[music] ships after animals.
Just behind it were the seats of ease,
simple, open-air toilets positioned at
the bow, where waste could be [music]
discharged directly into the sea, and
wave action helped wash the area clean.
These served as the primary toilets for
the crew.
The view was amazing, but in rough seas,
using them could be quite an experience.
The ship carried multiple anchors.
On either side of the bow were the bower
anchors, the ship's primary anchors.
Just behind them were spare bower
anchors carried as backups.
Smaller anchors were also kept on board
for maneuvering and positioning the
ship.
Above the bow rose the [music]
forecastle, a raised working deck used
heavily during anchoring and sail
operations.
Here, and across the upper deck,
belaying pins inserted into wooden pin
rails [music] secured the running
rigging.
Even in her role as an exploration
vessel, the Beagle still carried some
armament. [music]
Dominating this space was a carronade, a
short, powerful gun mounted on a
turntable designed for close-range
combat.
Also, here was the galley cow, venting
smoke from the stove below.
>> [music]
>> Between the raised ends was an open
section of the upper deck below.
At the stern, [music]
the poop deck served as the ship's
command center with the azimuth compass
mounted at its forward end.
It was used to measure magnetic azimuth,
the horizontal angle between a distant
object, such as the sun, and magnetic
north.
In practice, this allowed navigators to
determine the ship's direction with far
greater precision than a standard
compass alone.
The instrument itself was built around a
magnetic compass with its card divided
into 360°.
Mounted around it were two sights
positioned opposite each other, which
could be rotated to line up with a
distant object, such as the sun.
This allowed navigators to determine
precise directions in degrees, but not
their exact position, which required
other instruments we'll explore later.
Nearby, a skylight in the middle brought
natural light into the deck below.
Aft of it was the sounding winch, used
to measure water depth beneath the
vessel.
A weighted line was lowered until it
reached the seabed, providing critical
information for charting unknown waters.
At the stern, the ship's name was
typically painted or carved as a visual
identifier.
Beneath it was the rudder, used to steer
the vessel, a system we'll discuss in
more detail shortly.
Below the raised decks lay the upper
deck, the ship's main gun deck, running
the full length of the vessel.
At the stern was the chart room, where
navigation instruments and charts were
kept, and where Darwin lived during the
second voyage.
One of the Beagle's primary missions was
to produce accurate nautical charts for
navigation, which required some of the
most advanced instruments available at
the time.
Like today, in the 19th century,
navigators determine their position at
sea using two coordinates, latitude and
longitude.
Latitude measures north-south position
relative to the equator with lines of
constant latitude called parallels
running east-west as circles parallel to
the equator.
Longitude measures east-west position
relative to the prime meridian, which
passes through Greenwich, England, with
lines of constant longitude called
meridians running north-south from pole
to pole.
To calculate latitude, the crew used a
sextant. It was used to measure the
angle between the horizon and a
celestial body, like the sun or a star.
The instrument itself was built around a
metal frame shaped like a sector of a
circle with a graduated arc marked in
degrees.
Mounted to that frame were a handle for
holding it steady, an index arm that
swept along the arc and could be locked
in place with a screw, and two mirrors,
the index mirror mounted on the index
arm and the horizon mirror fixed to the
frame and split vertically into two
halves, one reflective, one clear.
A sighting telescope was aligned with
the horizon mirror, and pivoting shades
could be placed over the mirrors to
reduce glare from the sun.
Let's take a quick look at how it was
used during the day.
The index arm was first set to the zero
mark, making the two mirrors parallel.
The telescope was aimed at the horizon.
Because the mirrors were parallel, the
horizon could be seen through both the
clear and reflective halves of the
horizon mirror.
While keeping the horizon in view, the
index arm was moved forward along the
arc.
As it shifted, the index mirror tilted,
and eventually the image of the sun
appeared in the reflective half of the
horizon mirror.
The arm was adjusted until the bottom
edge of the sun aligned with the
horizon, then locked in place.
The resulting angle was read through the
index window on the arc.
Combined with the date of the
observation, that angle could be looked
up in nautical tables to determine the
ship's latitude.
But a sextant alone could not determine
longitude.
For that, the crew needed another
critical instrument, the chronometer.
A chronometer is a highly accurate clock
set to Greenwich Mean Time and kept
unchanged throughout the voyage.
Mounted in a wooden box with gimbals, it
was kept a level and isolated from the
ship's motion.
But how can a clock tell you where you
are?
To determine longitude, the crew used
the sextant to observe when the sun
reached its highest point in the sky,
marking local noon.
At that moment, they read the time on
the chronometer and noted the
difference.
Because the Earth rotates at a constant
rate, each hour of time difference
corresponds to 15° of longitude east or
west of the prime meridian.
This allowed the crew to calculate the
ship's longitude.
Together, the azimuth compass, sextant,
and chronometer allowed the crew to
determine the ship's direction and
calculate its position with remarkable
precision for the time.
Next to the chart room was a water
closet, typically reserved for the
officers.
Forward of the chart room stood the
ship's wheel, used to steer the vessel.
Turning the wheel rotated a drum wrapped
with a rope.
Each end of that rope ran through
pulleys mounted in the floor and
attached to the tiller inside the chart
room, a horizontal lever controlling the
rudder.
>> [music]
>> As the wheel turned, one side of the
rope was pulled while the other was
released, moving the tiller and turning
the rudder.
Next to the wheel was the binnacle,
which housed the ship's magnetic compass
used to maintain the vessel's heading.
On one side of the wheel was a small
storage space, and on the other, an
officer's cabin.
In the open central section of the upper
deck were two skylights for the
captain's cabin and mess room below, a
companionway and two hatchways leading
down to the next deck, a winch for sail
rigging, and six guns kept in a stowed
position.
Two manual bilge pumps removed water
that collected in a well in the hold.
During the day, the crew's hammocks were
stowed along the hammock rails to keep
them dry and out of the way.
In battle, those same hammocks offered
some protection from splinters and
debris.
Also here was a windlass, a heavy
anchor-lifting mechanism made up of two
horizontal wooden drums mounted on the
[music] same axis, each handling a
separate anchor chain.
Each drum could be worked independently
by a hand crank on its outer end, while
the inner end carried a drum head with
sockets for handspikes when extra
leverage was needed. A ratchet and pawl
system prevented the drums from spinning
backward under load.
Each anchor chain wrapped around its
respective drum, then passed through a
deck-mounted chain stopper that locked
it in place when not [music] in use,
before running through a pipe down into
the cabin locker in the hold, where
excess chain was stored.
In the section of the upper deck below
the forecastle, the bowsprit step
[music] sat at the center, anchoring the
inner end of the bowsprit into the
ship's structure.
On one side was the carpenter storeroom,
holding tools and repair materials, and
on the other, the boatswain's storeroom,
where rigging and deck equipment were
kept.
Below that lay the lower deck, the
ship's main accommodation level.
Positioned at the waterline, it had no
side openings and depended entirely on
the skylight and hatchway above for
light and ventilation.
At the bow were the sick bay, the crew's
personal storage area, and the galley
with a stove for preparing meals.
At midships was the crew's birth, a
large open space used as both mess and
sleeping area where the crew hung their
hammocks.
Around it were officers' cabins and
storerooms, and also the mess room where
officers gathered to eat.
At the stern was the captain's cabin
with the captain's storeroom just behind
it.
Several floor [music] hatches in this
deck gave access to the hold below where
everything required for a long voyage
was stored beneath the crew's feet.
Starting at the stern, [music]
the hold contained the bread room for
biscuits and flour.
Next came the mess room storeroom with
food and supplies, followed by the
magazine for gunpowder used by the
ship's weapons.
Beyond that was the spirit room where
alcohol such as rum was kept under
controlled access.
At midships was the well where bilge
water collected before being pumped out.
Next was the main hold where fresh water
was stored in large iron casks, an
upgrade from the wooden casks more
commonly used on ships of the era,
along with salted meat and other dry
provisions kept in wooden casks.
Farther forward was the sail room for
spare sails and rigging with the chain
locker below for stowing the anchor
chains. And finally, at the bow was a
storeroom [music] holding coal for the
galley stove along with additional
provisions.
Throughout [music] the hold,
high-density iron ballast blocks known
as kentledge were laid along the bottom
of the hold to lower the ship's center
of gravity and improve stability.
After completing three major survey
voyages, HMS Beagle's role shifted once
more in 1845.
She entered a final phase of service as
[music] a static coast guard watch
vessel stationed along the English coast
to help prevent smuggling.
But by then, her most important [music]
work had already been done.
The charts produced during her voyages
were so [music] precise that they
remained the official standard for some
regions well into [music] the mid-20th
century, guiding ships long after the
Beagle herself had fallen [music]
silent.
Yet, her greatest impact reached far
beyond navigation.
During her second voyage, the
observations made on board by Charles
Darwin would go on to shape the
development of the theory of evolution,
fundamentally changing how we understand
life on Earth.
A small wooden warship [music]
built for combat that never fired a shot
in anger, yet helped transform science
forever.
While the Beagle would go on to explore
the world, other ships served a very
different purpose.
Decades earlier, the Royal Navy launched
another class of warship built to carry
more guns, one that, this time, brought
its full firepower to real naval
battles.
HMS Pegasus was one of them.
Check out this video to see exactly how
it was built, how it worked, and how
ships like this fought at sea.
Thanks for watching. Stay curious.